# How to Install Piwigo on Ubuntu with Nginx

*A guide for the installation of [Piwigo](https://piwigo.org/) 14-RC1 - an open source photo management software - on Ubuntu Server 23.10 with Nginx.*

A couple of weeks ago my home server - an Odroid XU4 - finally passed away. It has been running 24/7 for 8 years, but its USB ports now repeatedly fail which is not great when external drives are needed. I thus thought about a few different options, including cloud based services, but decided that I still wanted a home server of some sort to host such services.

I had an old Dell Inspiron 1501 laptop gathering dust, as well as a few spare parts. I figured I'll likely have to redo this whole process in *I hope* a few years, so I should document it!

## About Piwigo

A few years ago I searched for a solution that would easily allow me to share my photos with my family, friends and acquaintance without losing control and ownership of my data. I looked for self-hosted solutions that:

- Didn't mess with the files and folders of my existing collection.
- Allowed me to define users, groups, permissions, albums and other means of organizing pictures, still without messing up my collection.
- Was easy to install and didn't require docker (my home servers were old single board computers which didn't support it).

<br />

[Piwigo](https://piwigo.org/) was the clear winner for me!

> I realized late in this process that Piwigo 13 does not support PHP 8.2. I installed Ubuntu 23.10 because I kept getting kernel panic errors with the latest LTS release (with various installation media & methods), and 23.10 worked like a charm on the first try with the same medium & method. Ubuntu 23.10, however, does NOT include PHP <8.2, and [Ondřej Surý's PPA](https://launchpad.net/~ondrej/+archive/ubuntu/php) does not cover non-LTS releases
> This is why I ended up installing [Piwigo 14's release candidate 1](https://piwigo.org/forum/viewtopic.php?id=33195) instead of the latest official version. The steps below work just as well for Piwigo 14.0.0RC1 than for version 13, and would also work fine for the latest Ubuntu LTS release except where noted (switch php8.2 with php8.1).
> I'm sorry for the inconvenience, but I'm not ready to redo the whole installation just to downgrade to PHP 8.1 and Piwigo 13, and upgrade to 14 in perhaps a couple of weeks!

## Server Setup

I used [balenaEtcher](https://etcher.balena.io/) to flash an USB drive and install [Ubuntu Server 23.10](https://ubuntu.com/download/server) on an old Dell Inspiron 1501 laptop, upgraded with a 120 GB internal SSD. From the BIOS, pressing F12 allows you to select the USB drive to boot, and the steps are relatively self-explanatory. I did opt out of using the LVM option for the installation because I didn't see much need for it in my case after reading this [ask Ubuntu question](https://askubuntu.com/questions/3596/what-is-lvm-and-what-is-it-used-for).

My media files are stored on a 1 TB external SSD, sadly *not* connected through a USB 3.0 port.

I don't like this laptop; it's heavy and has very poor battery autonomy. I believe however that this makes it a pretty good server candidate:

- Being used as a server, it won't have to be moved around once it's installed in my office.
- While the battery won't last long, it'll still allow the system to shutdown gracefully during power outages.
- The builtin screen and keyboard are convenient for the initial setup and future troubleshooting.

### Additional Packages

There are a few additional packages I particularly fancy in any Linux installation, including:

- `dtrx`: As the name implies ("do the right extraction"), this versatile tool easily extracts multiple types of archives such as zip, rar, tar, gz, etc.
- `elinks`: A simple console based browser for times when `wget` doesn't do the trick easily, e.g.: To download Piwigo's installation archive.
- `fish`: My choice of shell. It gets installed under `/usr/bin/fish` on Ubuntu, and running `chsh` allows you to replace the default shell (`/bin/bash`) with this one on future logins.

<br />

While logged into the server, I installed those with:

```shell
sudo apt update && sudo apt dist-upgrade && sudo apt install dtrx elinks fish
```

### Timezone

To find my timezone I ran `tzselect` and followed the prompts. I ignored the last instructions about changing `.profile` and simply used the following command to set the system's timezone to the location provided by `tzselect`:

```shell
sudo timedatectl set-timezone America/Toronto
```

Executing `date` from the shell confirms that the timezone was updated correctly.

## Install Piwigo

I didn't completely follow [Piwigo's manual installation guide](https://piwigo.org/guides/install/manual). I first used `elinks` to get the archive directly from the server:

```shell
elinks https://piwigo.org/get-piwigo
```

I then let `dtrx` do its magic to extract the archive, using the `_H_ere` option to extract the files in a folder simply named "piwigo", and then moved it to `/srv`:

```shell
dtrx piwigo-13.8.0.zip
sudo mv piwigo /srv
sudo chown -R www-data:www-data /srv/piwigo
```

Piwigo also requires [ImageMagick](https://imagemagick.org/) to be installed in order to manipulate pictures:

```shell
sudo apt install imagemagick
```

### Mount the External SSD

I have an existing pictures collection which is stored on an external SSD formatted with a single, 1 TB ext4 partition. It does include other data, not just pictures, so I mounted the whole SSD on `/mnt` and bound its `Photos` subfolder to `/srv/piwigo/galleries/Photos` in `/etc/fstab`. Firstly, I connected the SSD and found its UUID with the `blkid` command:

```shell
michel@dell ~> blkid
/dev/sdb1: UUID="2f1e915c-8bbd-49c9-a741-17cc87547034" BLOCK_SIZE="4096" TYPE="ext4" PARTLABEL="Extreme SSD" PARTUUID="aac32210-fd83-49a6-86a2-eb8c4f374e0e"
/dev/sda2: UUID="fbe02282-b743-475f-ae63-36c4358706de" BLOCK_SIZE="4096" TYPE="ext4" PARTUUID="95a505c4-9991-4a21-b0eb-d28952ed2e25"
```

I then added the following 2 lines to `/etc/fstab` using `sudo nano /etc/fstab`:

```
# <file system> <mount point>   <type>  <options>       <dump>  <pass>
UUID=2f1e915c-8bbd-49c9-a741-17cc87547034 /mnt ext4 defaults,noatime,discard,nofail 0 2
/mnt/Photos /srv/piwigo/galleries/Photos none defaults,bind 0 2
```

Here are some details about the fields in `/etc/fstab`:

- `UUID`: The unique identifier of the SSD partition I obtained with `blkid`.
- `/mnt`: The mount point where I want to mount the SSD.
- `ext4`: The filesystem type of the SSD (mine had already been formatted to ext4 with the `mkfs.ext4` command).
- `defaults`: Default options.
- `noatime`: This option disables the recording of access times, which can reduce disk writes and improve performance.
- `discard`: This option enables TRIM support, which is beneficial for SSDs to improve performance and longevity (make sure your SSD and filesystem support TRIM before using this option).
- `nofail`: This option prevents the system from halting the boot process if the SSD is not present. It's useful for external drives that might not always be connected. I might add other services that don't depend on the SSD in the future, so halting boot would be a problem.
- `0`: This field is used by the dump command to determine which filesystems need to be dumped. A value of 0 disables the dump.
- `2`: This field is used by the fsck command to determine the order in which filesystem checks are done at boot time. A value of 2 means that the filesystem should be checked after all others.

<br />

The second line is simply a bind used to create a mirror of a mounted filesystem or a subdirectory within one filesystem to another location. It essentially allows you to create a link or connection between two directory trees within the same filesystem. In this case, `UUID` is replaced with the source directory.

After editing `/etc/fstab`, the SSD is mounted by running:

```shell
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo mount -a
```

The last step changes ownership of the whole directory to the user tied to my web server of choice by default ([nginx](https://nginx.org/en/)).

## Install and Configure nginx

I used [nginx](https://nginx.org/en/) as my reverse proxy, perhaps by force of habit but also to standardize encryption and configuration of my various web services. I installed it with:

```shell
sudo apt install nginx install php8.2-fpm php8.2-mysql mariadb-server
```

> PHP-FPM (FastCGI Process Manager) is a highly efficient and scalable implementation of the FastCGI (Fast Common Gateway Interface) protocol for PHP. It's used to handle Piwigo which is essentially a PHP web application.

> For Piwigo 13 on Ubuntu LTS, install `php8.1-fpm` and `php8.1-mysql` instead of the above.

I then setup a basic site configuration which will then be managed by certbot to add encryption:

```nginx
server {
        listen 80;
        listen [::]:80;

        server_name <my domain name>;
        root /srv/piwigo;
        index index.php;

        location / {
                try_files $uri $uri/ =404;
        }

        location ~ \.php$ {
               include snippets/fastcgi-php.conf;
               fastcgi_pass unix:/run/php/php8.2-fpm.sock;
        }
}
```

> For Piwigo 13 on Ubuntu LTS, use `fastcgi_pass unix:/run/php/php8.1-fpm.sock;` instead of the above.

### Dynamic DNS

I've been using [DynDNS](https://dyndns.com/) for years to manage my dynamic DNS services but I don't particularly recommend it. I switched to [FreeDNS](https://freedns.afraid.org/) for this blog and will probably do the same for my personnal web services once my yearly subscription ends. This step completely depends on the choice of service but in a nutshell, the goal is to instruct the world that your domain of choice (ex.: piwigo.myserver.net) is tied to the IP address your ISP has assigned to your home dynamically (e.g.: it might change in the future).

I use [ddclient](https://ddclient.net/) to update my IP address automatically and forget about it. A configuration wizard is launched automatically after installing it; to make it easier you should setup your FreeDNS, DynDNS (or otherwise) account beforehand:

```bash
sudo apt install ddclient
```

### Let's Encrypt!

As explained on [their website](https://certbot.eff.org/pages/about):

> Certbot is a free, open source software tool for automatically using [Let’s Encrypt](https://letsencrypt.org/) certificates on manually-administrated websites to enable HTTPS.

I use it to encrypt each of my web services, including this blog. Installation and configuration on Ubuntu is very straightforward when following [Certbot's installation instructions](https://certbot.eff.org/instructions):

```shell
sudo snap install --classic certbot
sudo certbot --nginx
```

If everything goes fine, you should receive a message similar to this one at the end of the process:

```
Deploying certificate
Successfully deployed certificate for piwi.homeip.net to /etc/nginx/sites-enabled/piwigo
Congratulations! You have successfully enabled HTTPS on https://<your-domain>
```

## Configure Piwigo

If my setup were entirely new, I would then follow [step 3 from Piwigo's installation manual](https://piwigo.org/guides/install/manual#step3-manual-installation) to finalize its installation and configuration. That's probably what you want to do if you are reading this. Nonetheless, here are the steps I followed.

> I believe you might still have to create the user and database in the next step even without the existing database dump.

### Configure MariaDB and Restore Dump

MariaDB was created as a fork of MySQL due to concerns about the direction of MySQL under Oracle Corporation's ownership, aiming to ensure the database system remained open-source and community-driven. I'm not sufficiently informed to have a strong opinion on those concerns but generally use MariaDB instead of MySQL, and tend to use their name interchangeably.

To create the piwigo database and user, I connected to the MariaDB monitor as root:

```
sudo mariadb -u root
```

Then from within the MariaDB monitor, I ran:

```mysql
CREATE DATABASE piwigo;
CREATE USER 'piwigo'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED BY 'my_password';
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON piwigo.* TO 'piwigo'@'localhost' WITH GRANT OPTION;
FLUSH PRIVILEGES;
EXIT;
```

I then restored my SQL dump from the shell with the following command:

```shell
sudo mariadb -u root piwigo < my_dump.sql
```

## Optional Steps

The following steps are not mandatory, but were nice little additions considering the use of an old laptop as a server.

### Turn Screen Off

The laptop's screen doesn't turn itself off automatically. I therefore used [these instructions](https://askubuntu.com/questions/62858/turn-off-monitor-using-command-line) to do it manually using a `fish` function:

```shell
function screen_off
	sudo sh -c 'vbetool dpms off; read ans; vbetool dpms on'
end
```

```shell
funcsave screen_off
```

Calling `screen_off` turns the screen off, and pressing `enter` turns it back on.

### Automated Backups

It's always a good idea to run automated backups; systems fail. I use [rclone](https://rclone.org/) to upload mine to [iDrive e2](https://www.idrive.com/object-storage-e2/), a very nice cloud storage service with flexible pricing. I include a [database dump](https://mariadb.com/kb/en/mariadb-dump/), my configuration files (at least those covered in this article), and use [duplicity](https://duplicity.gitlab.io/) to create incremental backups of my collection. I encrypt my backups with [openssl](https://opensource.com/article/21/4/encryption-decryption-openssl) before uploading them to the cloud for privacy and safety.

### Shutdown on Loss of Power

I haven't done this bit yet, but I'll use the `acpi` package to turn the laptop off automatically when it looses its AC power, maybe after a few minutes or under a certain charge percentage. Its battery likely won't last until the end of the outage.

## Closing Thoughts

I'm sure this guide will at least be useful to future-me, and I hope it'll help others as well. Please let me know if you believe I have missed anything important!
