# Cleaning up loops

*A summary of how I restructured my robot's code using behavioral programming.*

My background is not in computer science, but one of the things I like most about programming is restructuring projects. I still have much to learn about clean code architecture, but my favorite rewrite is without a doubt the following example. It was largely inspired by *Robot Programming - A Practical Guide to Behavior-Based Robots* from Joseph L. Jones.

While this example applies to robots, I believe the general principles could be applied to many other areas including optimization processes. For instance, it can be challenging to synthesize a colleague's thought process for a specific type of design, but if this process can be broken into concise rules or tips those can be modeled with the principles described below.

## Fighting bots

My elder brother and I have worked for about a decade on autonomous fighting robots. Both robots used various sensors to navigate in unknown environments with obstacles, detect each other with a camera, and shoot at each other with a BB gun. Shields would register impacts and count life loss. During this time, we went through several generations of chassis, controllers and peripherals.

### The code mess

One version of our common software (a [Python project shared on GitHub](https://github.com/miek770/marcus-base)) used a huge continuous loop (`while(True)`) that handled everything from data acquisition to decision making and action. Each iteration of the main loop would query each sensor and set the output of each actuator (e.g.: motor).

This quickly became a mess when slightly more complex behaviors were introduced. For example, consider the following logic for a simple evasion manoeuver (FLRF = Front Left Range Finder, FRRF = Front Right RF):

```python
# Nearby obstacle on the left
if x < FLRF < y:

    # No obstacle on the right
    if FRRF > y:
        evade_right()

    # Nearby obstacle on the right
    elif x < FRRF < y:

        # Obstacle is farther on the left
        if FLRF > FRRF:
            evade_left()

        # Obstacle is farther on the right
        elif FLRF < FRRF:
            evade_right()

        else:
            evade_random()

    # Close obstacle on the right
    else:

        # The chassis is a tank; it turns on itself
        narrow_evade_left()
```

Using the same logic, this would have to be expanded to close obstacles on the left, and nearby and close obstacles on the right. Adding bumpers, other types of rangefinders for redundancy (e.g.: sonars), camera, BB gun impacts, etc. quickly becomes very cumbersome. It was already close to 200 lines long [before the change](https://github.com/miek770/marcus-base/blob/fd4ec3dc4cdc9ae09bd4acc391b9d088da966b2e/main.py), with many components and behaviors that had yet to be integrated.

### Behavioral programming

Behavioral programming definitely has wider meanings and implications than what I'll cover, but my understanding of it in this context is that it is a programming technique which aims to break down complex logics into modular pieces of code which cover specific behaviors (e.g.: narrow evasion), and are organized under relevant managers or arbiters (e.g.: motors arbiter).

When programming a behavior (e.g.: narrow evasion), we don't need to think of other behaviors such as "normal evasion", "impact" and "fire"; those will be handled by other behaviors.

Behaviors do not get to act (i.e.: change the actuator output); they only get to make requests (or vote) when they are queried by the arbiter (i.e.: the actuator's manager). The arbiter's role is to manage a series of relevant behaviors, organize them by priority (which could be fixed, dynamic, modulated, etc.), and act on its dedicated actuator. Each actuator has only 1 arbiter, but an arbiter could manage more than 1 actuator (e.g.: 2 motors).

The restructured code looks like this:

* **Main loop**: Simply loop through each arbiter and wait a bit between iterations.
  * **Arbiter**: Manage a single actuator (or a set of associated actuators) and its behaviors.
    * **Behavior**: Ask for an actuator output (or not) depending on the sensors and their own logic.

> Some actions require several cycles (iterations) to be effective; those are named *manoeuvres* below.

Consider the following pacific exploration robot with only motors for actuators: it would have a single "Motor" arbiter, and as many behaviors as desired (priority in [#]):

* **Main loop:** Asks the "Motor" arbiter to run its evaluation, waits for a bit, and repeats.
  * **Arbiter - Motor:** Evaluates behaviors in ascending order of priority and stops at the first behavior which asks for an action, or which has a manoeuver in progress; performs actions.
    * **[0] Behavior - Memory:** Never takes action; this behavior simply logs everything and makes it available to other behaviors (to do as they please).
    * **[1] Behavior - Impact:** Has the highest priority amongst action-taking behaviors; we hit something! Back up before turning (this is a *manoeuver* that requires several cycles to complete).
    * **[2] Behavior - Normal evasion:** Evade obstacles smoothly (e.g.: wide evasion) (no *manoeuver* required).
    * **[3] Behavior - Narrow evasion:** The obstacle is close, the robot should turn in place if it can (no *manoeuver* required).
    * **[4] Behavior - Statism:** Detect if the robot is stuck by checking if the sensors haven't changed in a while. If so, a *manoeuver* is required to unstick the robot.
    * **[5] Behavior - Exploration:** If none of the previous behaviors triggered an action, this one keeps the robot moving and sometimes changes direction with some randomness.

<br />

This structure greatly benefits from object oriented programming; each arbiter is derived from a base `Arbiter` class, likewise for the base `Behavior` class. Adding and registering new behaviors and shifting priorities is also very simple, and I believe [the code is clean and understandable (in French)](https://github.com/miek770/marcus-base).

Behavioral programming can lead to the emergence of more complex behaviors. For example, if we add a "Gun" arbiter to the above, the robot could fire at its opponent while evading obstacles. I can't say I was amazed by completely unexpected complex behaviors during our tests, but I was certainly pleased and impressed by how the robot smoothly shifted from one behavior to the next to adapt to its evolving situation.

## Final thoughts

This restructuring was one of my most satisfying coding experiences; it turned a mess into something I loved and which could easily be shared with others (including my future self). It expanded my understanding of inheritance, reusability, adaptability and maintainability, and generally improved my appreciation for object oriented programming.

I am not planning on reviving the robotic project soon - that ship has sailed - but I have many ideas of where these principles could be applied at work. For example, an electrical distribution or collection system could be optimized with behaviors that stem from several sources (e.g.: colleagues, industry guidelines, standards, etc.), and behaviors could be defined with simple rules such as ***if voltage drop is above X%, increase cable size*** and ***if size is greater than X, add conductors in parallel***. Corrections could be automated, but the program could also simply raise warnings as part of an automated review & quality control program.

I believe behavioral programming is already popular in game design (i.e.: to create dynamic and intelligent non-player characters), and I assume it could be used in virtually any process automation (e.g.: traffic management, healthcare, home automation, energy management, etc.).
