# My Python TUI Project Template

*How I aim to start every new Python TUI project from now on using uv, Textual and Nuitka.*

I think a lot about managing my Python projects these days and I've recently converted to poetry, as shown in my [previous post](2024-09-28.md). I have however been hearing a lot about [uv](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) and [Python Bytes' episode 404](https://pythonbytes.fm/episodes/show/404/the-lost-episode)'s reference to Hynek's video [uv IS the Future of Python Packaging](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8UuW8o4bHbw) convinced me to give it a try.

The other thing I've been meaning to try for a while is [Textual](https://textual.textualize.io/) to build terminal user interfaces (TUI). Something about its aesthetics, usage and capabilities is so very satisfying. Its flexibility means that I could use it for many types of applications, and it would be quite smaller as a single file program (compiled with [Nuitka](https://nuitka.net/)) compared to GUI solutions.

Note that this template is not prepared for projects I intend to distribute on [PyPI](), which is why I don't cover packaging in this article.

Here's a preview of my template structure and content, see further down for details:

```
├── .gitignore
├── LICENSE
├── Makefile
├── .pre-commit-config.yaml
├── pyproject.toml
├── .python-version
├── README.md
├── src
│   └── __init__.py
│   ├── tui.py
├── tests
│   ├── __init__.py
│   └── test_hello.py
└── uv.lock
```

>I generated this output with `tree -a --gitignore` on Linux; the `-a` option includes hidden files and the `--gitignore` considers the content of my `.gitignore` file to ignore irrelevant files and directories.

## Requirements

### uv

The main requirement needed to use this template is `uv`, which can be installed by following its [installation instructions](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/). It can be used to install Python versions but I haven't tried this feature yet.

### Make

To build the application with [Nuitka]() on Linux, I needed to install the following packages on Arch Linux. These requirements will differ depending on the operating system, but [Nuitka's documentation]() should explain how to proceed in each case:

- `ccache`: To speed up subsequent builds.
- `gcc`: To compile the application.
- `patchelf`: To use the `--standalone` option on Linux.

### Git

[Git]() is optional, but I use it for each of my software projects and to save this template on a private [GitHub]() repository. See its [installation instruction]() for details.

## Usage

Reusing this template takes a few easy steps:

1. Clone the template repository (origin):

```
git clone git@github.com:miek770/python_uv_nuitka_tui_template.git
```

2. Disconnect the clone from its origin:

```
ADD COMMAND TO DELETE ORIGIN
```

3. Synchronize the Python project with `uv`:

```
uv sync
```

4. Install pre-commit hooks:

```
uv run pre-commit install
uv run pre-commit
```

That's all! From this point on, packages can be added with `uv add <package>`, tests can be run with `make tests` and builds can be compiled with `make build`.

Once I'm happy with my progress and ready for my first commit, I attach and push the project to a blank repository with the following commands (after running `git commit -m <message>`):

```
ADD COMMAND TO ADD NEW ORIGIN
git push
```

## Template Details

Here's the content of my template, with details below for each file and directory:

```
├── .gitignore
├── LICENSE
├── Makefile
├── .pre-commit-config.yaml
├── pyproject.toml
├── .python-version
├── README.md
├── src
│   └── __init__.py
│   ├── tui.py
├── tests
│   ├── __init__.py
│   └── test_hello.py
└── uv.lock
```

## File `.gitignore`

My `.gitignore` file contains:

```
*.bin
*build
*dist
*.egg-info
.git
.mypy_cache
__pycache__
.pytest_cache
.venv
*.xml
```

As mentioned above, using the `--gitignore` option with `tree` considers the content of this file to map files and directories structures.

## File `LICENSE`

I use the [MIT license]() for each of my open source projects.

## File `Makefile`

I'm not sure yet if and how I should setup such actions with [uv](), so for now I'll stick with a good old `Makefile`. I should extend it to adapt the build depending on the machine (the [Nuitka]() options won't be the same on Windows), but in the meantime here it is:

```Makefile
build:
	uv run nuitka --onefile src/tui.py

tests:
	uv run pytest

.PHONY: build tests
```

## File `.pre-commit-config.yaml`

This file applies a few hooks, including [black](), before each commit. They can also be launched manually with `uv run pre-commit`:

```yaml
repos:
-   repo: https://github.com/pre-commit/pre-commit-hooks
    rev: v5.0.0
    hooks:
    -   id: trailing-whitespace
    -   id: end-of-file-fixer
    -   id: check-yaml
    -   id: check-added-large-files
-   repo: https://github.com/psf/black
    rev: 24.10.0
    hooks:
    -   id: black
```

## Files `pyproject.toml`, `.python-version` and `uv.lock`

In the template these file are entirely generated and managed by [uv](). `pyproject.toml` will be adapted per project; here's its current content:

```toml
[project]
name = "uv-nuitka-textual-template"
version = "0.1.0"
description = "Add your description here"
readme = "README.md"
requires-python = ">=3.12"
dependencies = [
    "textual>=0.83.0",
]

[tool.uv]
dev-dependencies = [
    "black>=24.10.0",
    "nuitka>=2.4.8",
    "pre-commit>=4.0.1",
    "pytest>=8.3.3",
    "pytest-asyncio>=0.24.0",
    "pytest-textual-snapshot>=1.0.0",
]
```

The `pytest-asyncio` and `pytest-textual-snapshot` libraries are required to test the TUI interface (see basic test below).

>I could have included all dependencies without the `--dev` flag because projects based on this template are not meant to be distributed uncompiled; there is no expected `--no-dev` use case. I still left it as is because it felt like good practice and `uv` will install development dependencies by default (`--dev` is assumed with `uv sync`).

## File `README.md`

Pretty typical, there are so many great resources online to help create readme files with tips, tools and examples.

There are also generators, which I sometimes use to create rough drafts rather than final versions, but I'm not very fond of this approach.

As a reminder for future me, animations are great and I should use them more. I've recently tried [asciinema](https://asciinema.org/) and liked it, but the fact that I couldn't embed the animation to my [GitHub]() readme bothers me (it's a link to asciinema's website). I would prefer generating and embedding an animated `.gif`.

## Directory `src`

The `src` directory contains the source code for my application; the `tui.py` file will be its entry point. If I extend my application with CLI and GUI interfaces, `cli.py` and `gui.py` files will be added for each one.

The `__init__.py` file is needed for [pytest]().

### File `src/tui.py`

This file simply contains the necessary code for a *hello world* demo on [Textual]():

```python
from textual.app import App
from textual.widgets import Input, Button, Header, Footer, Static
from textual.containers import Container


class HelloApp(App):

    BINDINGS = [
        ("d", "toggle_dark", "Toggle dark mode"),
        ("q", "quit", "Quit"),
    ]

    def compose(self):
        yield Header()
        yield Footer()
        yield Container(
            Input(placeholder="Enter your name", id="name_input"),
            Button(label="Submit", id="submit_button"),
            Static(id="greeting_output"),
        )

    def on_button_pressed(self, event: Button.Pressed):
        name_input = self.query_one("#name_input", Input)
        greeting_output = self.query_one("#greeting_output", Static)
        name = name_input.value.strip()
        if name:
            greeting_output.update(f"Hello {name}!")
        else:
            greeting_output.update("Please enter a valid name.")

    def action_toggle_dark(self) -> None:
        self.dark = not self.dark

    def action_quit(self):
        self.exit()


if __name__ == "__main__":
    HelloApp().run()
```

See [here]() for great [Textual]() application examples.

## Directory `tests`

The `tests` directory is used automatically by [pytest]() to find an execute automated tests. I try to include sufficient tests in my projects and thus included a basic one to check the generation of the TUI.

It should be extended to testing the TUI response to input; see [Textual testing]() for details. For now, here's my basic test for this template:

```python
import pytest

from app.hello import HelloApp


@pytest.mark.asyncio
async def test_initial_state():
    """Test that the initial state of the app is correct."""
    app = HelloApp()

    async with app.run_test() as pilot:
        assert app.screen.get_widget_by_id("name_input").value == ""
        assert "Submit" in app.screen.get_widget_by_id("submit_button").label
        assert app.screen.get_widget_by_id("greeting_output").renderable == ""
```

## Conclusion

I have only very recently started using `uv` and `Textual` and both motivate me to make new projects (or rewrite existing projects, which I'm trying to resist). This template along with a few others (TUI, CLI, GUI and Python package) will ease their creation in a somewhat standardized way and help me familiarize myself with the toolkit I have chosen to use.