# Managing and Sharing Notebooks

*How I handle dependencies for Jupyter Notebooks shared within engineering firm.*

For decades, designers have been using Excel spreadsheets to perform engineering calculations. I've decided to abandon this approach several years ago and have strated converting our calculation notes to Jupyter Notebooks. I won't go into too much detail about the reasoning for this transition, but it boils down to an improvement in both efficiency and quality.

What started as a modest collection of a few Jupyter notebooks for engineering calculations grew over time to tens of notebooks of varying complexity, each with their own requirements.

Up to now I mostly used our private Git repository as a place to store and share the latest and greatest version of each notebook. I have decided to improve how I handle dependencies to allow us to keep up to date.

>[Pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/) is a good example of dependency that needs to be managed. Starting with [version 1.4.0, the `append` method has been deprecated](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/version/1.4/whatsnew/v1.4.0.html#whatsnew-140-deprecations-frame-series-append) whereas the majority of our notebooks used this method to combine calculation inputs.

## Repository Dependency Management

I decided to try [Poetry](https://python-poetry.org/) to manage the whole repository's dependencies, and `pytest` and `nbval` to look for failed executions.

>***Pertinent???*** I have only been using poetry for a few weeks (see [random_music](https://github.com/miek770/random_music) and [duplicate_songs](https://github.com/miek770/duplicate_songs)).

### Poetry

Once installed (see latest official instructions), the repository was initialized with:

`poetry init`

I then followed the interactive prompt to provide some details about the repo, and add dependencies manually.

#### Python Versions

Unfortunately, it looks like `poetry` does not allow users to manage multiple Python versions. To facilitate testing newer versions before migrating everyone, I use `pyenv`. After following the official installation instruction, I ran `pyenv install --list` to see the available versions, then `pyenv install <version>` to proceed with the installation.

`pyenv global <version>` and `pyenv local <version>` can then be used to respectively change the global and local version to be used when calling `python` from the terminal.

In the repo, the `python = "<version>"` clause must match this version for `poetry` to run without failure.

>I wish I could manage automated testing across several Python versions with Poetry, but it doesn't look possible out of the box.

### Testing

Once everything is setup, running:

`poetry run pytest --nbval-lax`

...allows us to run the tests while ignoring output differences between test runs, focusing only on errors.

#### Quality Control

We use automated tests in this repo to look for execution errors, not calculation errors. This is very different from what we do for libraries such as `energy_tools` where users are not expected to analyze the underlying code.

The calculation notes are made so that both the user and the technical review have all the information they need from the output PDF, which generally obfuscates all Python code. We show LaTeX formulas, `pandas` tables (dataframes) and dynamically generated text to make the note as dynamic as possible without showing code which could confuse non-programmers.

This means that the user and/or the reviewer take full responsibility for the correctness of the note, as expected for engineering calculations.

## Distribution
